The physical layer has an industry standardization which uses a shared set of standards allowing manufactures to build devices and transmission media that connects to media and devices from any other manufacturer on any network.

The physical layer is the transmission and reception of bits.

Data connection types:

- A simplex is a data connection that only works in one direction 
- A half duplex  is a data connection that will work in 2 different directions, but only in a single direction at a time
-A full duplex is a data connection that will work in 2 different directions, both working simultaneously



Bit Encoding:
Bits must first be converted to physical signals for transmission across media. Bits can be encoded to voltage levels for transmission over copper cables. Binary zero is equal to 0volts wheras Binary one is equal to +5 volts. Bits can be encoded to optical light levels  for transmission over fiber optic cables. Binary 0is equal to a dim light whereas Binary one is equal to a bright light. 

Units of measurement:

Bandwidth is described as the difference between the maximum and minimum frequencies in a wave form. Typically measured in Hertz (cycles per second). In networking bandwidth is understood to be the maximum rate at which bits can be moved. Throughput is the measure of actual movement of bits through media. Equipment and media will commonly be marked with a measurement of bandwidth with certian units: BPS, KBPS, MBPS, GBPS. 

Communication Media Types:
- Copper wire
    - Twisted pair
        - Unshielded twisted pair
        - Shielded twisted pair
    - Coaxial (Legacy)        
- Optical fiber
    - Single mode (SM)
    - Multi Mode (MM)
- Radio Frequency
    - WIFI 802.11
    - Bluetooth 802.15

Twisted pair cables have multiple pairs of wires and each pair is twisted separatly. Networking cables almost alwyas have 4 pairs. Signals are transmitted or recieved on a single wire. The twisting reduces both the emmisions of noise from the pair and the reception of noise from the pair. This is created by induction on the wire. Each pair in the cable has a different rate of twists per foot so signals emitted by one pair will not be recieved by another. This is called CROSSTALK. The unshielded twisted pair is the most common cab;e in the network and inexpensive compared to the shielded pair, coaxial, or optical. The shielded pair has a foil shield surrounding each pair of wires. This foil reduces the EMI/RFI noise interference. This cable is much more expensive so generally only used in excessivly noisey environments.

Cable Catagories:
-Cat 3: 10 MBPS(Fast Ethernet) 100 MHz
-Cat 5: 100 Mbps (Fast Ethernet) 100 MHz
-Cat 5e: 1 Gbps (Gigabit Ethernet, 1GigE, 1GbE) 100 MHz
-Cat 6: 1 Gbps (Gigabit Ethernet, 1GigE, 1GbE) >250 MHz
-Cat 6a: 10 Gbps (10GigE, 10GbE) 500 MHz
-Cat 7: 10 Gbps (10GigE, 10GbE) 600 MHz
-Cat 8: 25/40 Gbps (40GigE, 40Gbe) 2000 MHz (Depends on 8.1 or 8.2) [Also has reduced maximum length]

There are two types of twisted pair cable connectors:

RJ-45 which has 8 pins or the RJ-11 which only has 4 pins

The RJ-45 (Straight through cables) connects unlike devices, Pc to Switch or a Router to a Switch. It also connects (Cross over cables) like devices together such as a switch to a switch, a pc to a pc , a router to a router, or a pc to a router.

Optical Fiber cables conduct through light. They are made of a very thin tube of clear glass roughly the diameter of a human hair. This type of cable has a very high bitrate over long distances. 1 TBPS which is 1000 GBPS over 100 km (in single mode). 

Fiber Optic Cable Construction

- Light travels through the core
-The cladding keeps the light within the core
-Two main types of optic cable
   - Multimode (MM)
62.5 mm and 50 μm core diameters
Shorter range (550m at 10 Gbps)
Lower cost. Short distance – 0.5-0.6 km, between floors, maybe buildings.
Uses multiple light streams (850-1300 nm), usually generated by an LED. 
Outer jacket will be coloured orange, aqua, or lime green based on Optical Mode rating.
    - Single-mode (SM)
9 μm core diameter (nominal)
Can be 8.3 to 10 mm
Long range (100 Km at 1 Tbps). Long distance – 100 km+, between cities, etc.
Use a single light stream (1310 or 1550 nm), usually generated by a laser or laser diode.
Outer jacket will have a yellow colour, per standards.

Fiber Optical Connectors Screw Type:
    - FC Connector
Ferrule Connector was the first optical fiber connector to use a ceramic ferrule. Unlike the plastic-bodied SC and LC connector, it utilizes a round screw-type fitment made from nickel-plated or stainless steel. The FC connectors provide the choice in precision instruments, as well as the choice for single mode fiber. 
    - ST Connector
Straight Tip fiber optic connector was created and licensed by AT&T shortly after the arrival of the FC type. The ST optic connector holds the fiber with a ceramic, spring-loaded 2.5mm ferrule that stays in place with a half-twist bayonet mount. They are usually used in both long and short distance applications such as campuses and building multimode fiber applications, corporate network environments, as well as military applications.

Fiber optic cable has glass inside it! (Usually) If it is bent too sharply, the glass fiber can break very easily, which will require the cable to be replaced, or if possible, spliced. 
Even if the fiber doesn’t break, we can encounter light leakage, where the light of the signal does not all get reflected by the cladding, causing our signal to weaken. Fiber optic cables will be installed with specific bend radii, along with special cable management to keep the cable where it needs to be. 









































