The Media Access Control sub-layer deals with the protocols that specify the methods and functions used to convert data to bits, place it on the media, and reverse that process at the destination. 

Leased Line WAN links:
A leased line is a dedicated connection between a piece of equipment at the customer location to a piece of equipment at the lprovider location. Leased lines aare expensive because the media is not shared with other customers and are alwyas avaliable as they proovide reliability. They focus on delivering bits between sites rather than frames. 

High level data link control:

The most common encapsulation protocol at layer 2 for WAN links using leased lines. A bit oriented protocol uses 8-bit flags to indicate the beginning and the end of each frame. Many WAN links are asynchronus. The beginning and ending flags allow the devices to recognize the individual frames. They also can be used for point to point or multi point connections. 

Point to point is an encapsulation which provides direct connection between 2 devices(routers) without any other hosts involved. They can be used over many types of physical networks, including serial cable, telephone lines.They provide a mechanism to distinguish individual frames from each other. Frame relay is a non-broadcast multi-access WAN technology. Customers use special equipment(Data Communication Equipment Data Terminal Equipment) to convert to the probiders network. Devices are configured with virtual circuts which provide source and destination information (Data link identifier) but they allow the shared networkto move the frames as necessary. It delivers frames bwtween sites. Frame Relay is being phased out in favor of ethernet WANs.

Ethernet WANs are the default layer 2 protocol which use Advanced Reaserch Projects Agency encapulation to encasulate frames. They use packet switching technology to direct these frames through the provider network, using IP routing to select the best paths for transit. Ethernet WANs can be used for many different types of data on the same infrastructure. They easily integrate with existing ethernet LANs saving time and money whle delivering frames bwtween sites. 

Multi protocol label switching:

Multi protocol label switching is a technology that short-cuts the routing of packets by utilizing ‘labels’ that are added to packets to forward them rather than using the destination address. Multi protocol label switching is used to connect networks using many different protocols together, such as Ethernet, Frame Relay, IPv4, IPv6, and others. Multi protocol label switching encapsulates the different protocols, using short labels to indicate source, destination, and payload information. Customers can connect to the provider using a variety of protocols, Ethernet, Frame Relay, leased-lines, etc., and have their traffic encapsulated by Multi protocol label switching to transit through the provider network to their destination.

At the logical link control sub layer we deal with protocols that operate on layer 2. They affect the operation of the network and allow data to be accepted smoothly from layer 3 and forwarded onto its destination. 

The spanning tree protocol is one of the methods we use to improve our network technologies where we build redundancies using extra devices and links to provide services and paths incase of failure. Introducing redundant paths could lead to loops in the topology which can cause problems with broadcast traffic. Switches that revieve broadcast messages flood that message out of every port except the port on which it was recieved. This means that devices with more than one means of connection can cause a broadcast message to cycle between devices, called a broadcast strom. Rather than give up the redundant links which would make the network vunerable to failed connections, the spanning tree protocol was developed. 

Spanning-Tree Protocol determines which ports are connected to other switches, identifies redundant ports, and selects certain ports to place into a so called Blocked state, effectively removing the blocked port from being used. If a link is lost, blocked ports are re-evaluated to determine which port could be un-blocked to restore connectivity preserving redundancy, without the risk of loops. 

Device discovery protocols help the devices inside your network reach eachother. These protocols allow devices discover information about other devices on their local network. Traffic inside a LAN, the devices will use the MAC address to deliver the frame. While switches build up a MAC Address Table from incoming frames, not every device will have this information with which to address their frames. Every device should know the IP address of the device it is trying to reach though. The device sends an ARP request message with the destination IP address set to the target’s unicast address, while the MAC address is a broadcast address. Every device on the network will receive the frame, but only the device with the matching IP address will send an Address Resolution Protocol reply with it’s MAC address. Devices will build up an ARP cache contain this information over time, reducing the need for ARP requests. 

Cisco devices come with a protocol called Cisco Discovery Protocol. This allows Cisco devices on a local network to indentify other cisco devices. This includes the type of device, IOS version, the device name, and the number and type of interfaces on the device. Said Protocol is useful for network design, documentation, and network troubleshooting. These messages are sent regularly which allow devices to recognize when there is a change in the network, such as a device going offline. Not every networking device in the field is manufactured by Cisco, so a vendor-neutral discovery protocol was also developed. 

Link Layer Discovery Protocol will run on all networking devices, including Cisco devices. Link Layer Discovery Protocol provides the same functions as CDP, in the same way, by sending regular messages to other devices containing the operating information about the originating device. 

Neighbor Discovery Protocol is a protocol which allows device discovery in IPv6 enabled networks, and also facilitates certain aspects of IPv6 addressing. Neighbor Solicitation: This message is used to resolve a device’s IPv6 address to the MAC address, very much like ARP in IPv4. Neighbor Advertisement: This message works much like CDP or LLDP in IPv4, telling other devices about the sender’s capabilities. They are also used in Duplicate Address Detection, a part of IPv6’s address configuration. When a device receives an IPv6 unicast or link-local address it will send a neighbor solicitation to the newly applied address. If they receive a neighbor advertisement from another device in response, they recognize that the specified address is already in use and cannot be used again by themselves. 

Router Solicitation is when a device on the network does not know where to send traffic destined outside the local network, it will send a router solicitation message. This is sent to an anycast address and will be received by any router running IPv6. Router Advertisement is a message sent by an IPv6-enabled router to advertise its presence in the network, along with the network address, prefix-length, and addressing information on how to reach it as a default gateway, which allows other devices to auto-configure some of their network information. This can be sent in response to a router solicitation message, and as a regularly-sent update. 
